.TH SORD_VALIDATE 1 "21 Mar 2012"

.SH NAME
.B sord_validate \- Validate RDF data

.SH SYNOPSIS
sord_validate [OPTION]... INPUT...

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
Print the command line options.

.TP
\fB\-l\fR
Print errors on a single line.

.TP
\fB\-v\fR
Display version information and exit.

.SH DESCRIPTION
This is a simple validator which checks that all used properties are actually
defined, and that the domain and range of properties is explicitly correct.
Note that an "error" from this program does not necessarily mean data is
invalid, since it is not required to explicitly list types in RDF, however it
is a good idea to do so.

This program never retrieves data from the web or magical places on the file
system, it only processes files passed directly on the command line.  This
means you must pass all used vocabularies to get a useful result.

If an appropriate schema is available, literals are checked against datatype
definitions (both the explicit datatype of the literal itself as well as any
types implied by the corresponding property).  Three XML Schema Datatypes (XSD)
constraints are currently supported: regular expressions (xsd:pattern), and
inclusive range (xsd:minimumInclusive and xsd:maximumInclusive).  Given an
appropriate schema, this is enough to validate against most of the standard XSD
datatypes.

.SH EXAMPLES
sord_validate `find ~/schemas/ -name '*.ttl'` data.ttl

.SH AUTHOR
sord_validate was written by David Robillard <d@drobilla.net>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2012-2016 David Robillard.
.br
License: <http://www.opensource.org/licenses/isc-license>
.br
This is free software; you are free to change and redistribute it.
.br
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
<http://drobilla.net/software/sord>
